---
layout: post
title: "Online Masters in Computer Science"
blurb: "As I wrap up my Udacity Data Analyst Nano Degree, I look forward to my next steps as a Data Journeyman."
thumbnail: logo.png
tags: 
  - Personal
---

I am currently working on my final project for my Udacity Data Analyst Nano Degree. As I look forward to my next step, I've considered whether I wanted to follow a self-study regiment or if I wanted to take on a more formal training. Considering the amount of work I was able to accomplish through the Udacity program, I decided to continue going on the formal route.

So I'm happy to announce that I've been accepted into Georgia Tech's [Online Master's in Computer Science](http://www.omscs.gatech.edu) program. Georgia Tech, which is my alma mater, is partnering with Udacity for this program, so it's a perfect match for me. 

I plan to specialize in Machine Learning through the program. Of all of the topics I've come across in my time studying Data Science, Machine Learning is at the top of my interest, rivaled only by Data Visualization. However, I believe that the latter area has less applicability, or at least it doesn't seem to be growing at the same rate as Machine Learning. Plus, given the amount of tasks that are being picked off by automation, no field of study is truly safe, and I figure if Machine Learning falls to automation, then we'll be at the [singularity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity) anyway, so we're all pretty much doomed.

Naturally, this choice will affect the nature of my posts in the coming years, and the added work will likely result in a slower posting schedule, but that can be sorted out later once the program starts. In any case, exciting things are happening in the industry and I'm excited to take a step toward the direction of those things.